# Regex Tutorial: Matching a Hex Value

A regular expression (regex) is a sequence of characters that follows certain syntax conventions to define a search pattern. This way, one can search for more than just the literal string of characters entered into the search bar. By using a regex, you can search for a certain abstract format of string (such as locating all the phone numbers in a document, or all the usernames that meet certain security requirements).

## Summary

The regex to match a hex value is this: /^#?([a-f0-9]{6}|[a-f0-9]{3})$/

In this tutorial, I will be explaining the regex for matching a hex color value by breaking it down into and explaining each of its individual components.

## Table of Contents

- [Anchors](#anchors)
- [Quantifiers](#quantifiers)
- [OR Operator](#or-operator)
- [Character Classes](#character-classes)
- [Grouping and Capturing](#grouping-and-capturing)
- [Greedy and Lazy Match](#greedy-and-lazy-match)
- [Back-references](#back-references)
- [Look-ahead and Look-behind](#look-ahead-and-look-behind)

## Regex Components

### Anchors

Anchors in a regex refer to a position in a string. The regex for matching a hex value includes two anchors: '^' and '$'.

'^' refers to the beginning of a string. Using a regex expression with the '^' anchor will match any string that starts with the characters following the anchor. For example, the regex '^a' will match any string that begins with a lowercase 'a'. 

'$' refers to the end of a string. A regex including the '$' anchor will match any string that ends with the caracters preceding the achor. For example, 'b$' will match any string that ends with a lowercase 'b'.

Using both the '^' and '$' anchors in a regex will match the exact string enclosed between the two anchors. For example, '^abc$' will only match to the exact string 'abc', and not match anything with more, fewer, other, or differently positioned characters. 

The regex for matching a hex value begins with '^' and ends with '$', and so includes both anchors. Therefore, it will only match to entire strings that exactly match the criteria enclosed between the anchors, i.e. '#?([a-f0-9]{6}|[a-f0-9]{3})'. This criteria consists of other regex components, which are explained below. 

### Quantifiers

Quantifiers are regex components that relate to the preceding character (or preceding component), and defines how many of that (type of) character must be present in order to generate a match/result. The syntax for quantifiers is a numeral (and an optional comma and second numeral) within curly braces. 

The quantifiers in the regex for matching a hex value are both single digit numberals enclosed in curly braces: '{6}' and '{3}'. That means that the criteria preceding each of those quantifiers ('[a-f0-9]', explained below) will be included either 6 or 3 times, respectively, in any search result generated by the regex. 

### OR Operator

The '|' symbol in a regex is the OR operator. Expressions which include this operator will match with results that meet the criteria preceding OR following the '|'. 

In the regex to match a hex value, matches can meet the criteria defined by '[a-f0-9]{6}' OR '[a-f0-9]{3}', since those are on either side of the '|' operator. 

### Character Classes

Character classes define a group of characters, any of which can be considered as meeting the criteria to match the regex. 

One type of character class, which is featured in the regex for matching a hex value and indicated by the syntax of square brackets and a hyphen, is called a 'range'. In the hex value regex, the component '[a-f0-9]' defines a range of characters: lowercase letters a - f, and numeric digits 0 - 9. So, searching that expression would match with '7' or 'd' for example, but not 'x' since it is not included in the range defined between the square brackets.

### Grouping and Capturing

Placing characters or other regex components within parentheses is the syntax for capturing a group - i.e. matching with (types of) characters together grouped consecutively. 

The group component included in the regex for matching a hex value is '([a-f0-9]{6}|[a-f0-9]{3})'. Since all the included components have been covered in this tutorial, we can break this down:
- Based on the parentheses, we know this regex will match a group of (as opposed to discrete) characters. 
- Because of the '|' (OR operator), we can tell that this expression will match a group of characters that meets either the criteria defined by '[a-f0-9]{6}' OR '[a-f0-9]{3}'. 
- '[a-f0-9]' is included in both options defined by the OR operator, and refers to a range of characters including all lowercase letters from a-f and all single digit numerals. 
- The quantifiers '{6}' and '{3}' refer to the number of characters within the range that must be present to generate a match. 
- So, '([a-f0-9]{6}|[a-f0-9]{3})' will match with any GROUP of THREE or SIX characters that are defined by the range. 
- For example, '47d', '876fec' and 'aaaaab' would all match, but '47z', '876fecb' and '1111' would not. 

### Greedy and Lazy Match

Most searches use greedy match -- this means the algorithm will match as many characters or groups as possible. In order to enable 'lazy matching', include the '?' symbol.

The regex for matching a hex value includes a '?', which means it uses lazy match. A lazy match is the opposite of greedy in that it matches as few characters as possible. It will match anything containing zero or one of the preceding token. In this case, the token that precedes '?' is the '#' character. '#' isn't a regex symbol and so it literally matches with the '#' symbol. So, the regex '#?' will match with one '#' maximum, and still match if there is no '#' present. 

### Back-references

### Look-ahead and Look-behind

## Author

A short section about the author with a link to the author's GitHub profile (replace with your information and a link to your profile)
